>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, APRIL 17-- A POWERFUL
EARTHQUAKE STRIKES ECUADOR.
LOOKING AHEAD TO TUESDAY'S NEW
YORK PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
CHANGING THE WAY DOCTORS ARE
TAUGHT TO TREAT PAIN.
>> THE AMOUNT OF OPIOIDS THAT
WE'RE PRESCRIBING IS WAY TOO
MUCH AND THE AMOUNT OF EDUCATION
THE AVERAGE PRESCRIBER GETS IS
WAY TOO LITTLE AND THAT'S A
PRESCRIPTION FOR DISASTER.
>> Stewart: AND AMERICAN
COUNTRY MUSIC RESONATES IN
KENYA.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE SMALL SOUTH AMERICAN NATION
OF ECUADOR IS RECOVERING FROM
ITS MOST POWERFUL EARTHQUAKE IN
40 YEARS.
LAST NIGHT'S MASSIVE 7.8
MAGNITUDE QUAKE WAS CENTERED
NEAR THE TOWN OF PEDERNALES ON
ECUADOR'S PACIFIC COAST.
BUT IT COULD BE FELT IN THE
NATION'S CAPITAL, QUITO, 105
MILES AWAY.
THE QUAKE CAUSED DAMAGE ACROSS
THE NATION OF 16 MILLION PEOPLE.
THE MAYOR OF PEDERNALES SAID,
"THE ENTIRE TOWN COLLAPSED.
THERE'S NOTHING MUCH WE CAN DO."
ECUADOR'S PRESIDENT, RAFAEL
CORREA, SAYS AT LEAST 235 PEOPLE
HAVE DIED IN THE QUAKE, AND
1,500 MORE WERE INJURED.
THOUSANDS OF POLICE AND TROOPS
HAVE BEEN MOBILIZED TO KEEP
ORDER AND TO HELP RESCUE PEOPLE
TRAPPED IN THE RUBBLE.
VENEZUELA, CHILE AND MEXICO ARE
SENDING RELIEF WORKERS AND
SUPPLIES, AND U.S. MILITARY
AIRCRAFT ARE ASSISTING THE
MISSION.
IN JAPAN, RESCUE EFFORTS
FOLLOWING POWERFUL BACK-TO-BACK
EARTHQUAKES CONTINUED TODAY
AMIDST DOZENS OF SMALL
AFTERSHOCKS.
AUTHORITIES SAID ELEVEN PEOPLE
WERE STILL MISSING AFTER
THURSDAY'S AND FRIDAY'S QUAKES
ON JAPAN'S SOUTHERN ISLAND OF
KYUSHU.
RESCUERS TODAY PULLED 10 COLLEGE
STUDENTS FROM THE RUBBLE OF A
COLLAPSED APARTMENT BUILDING.
MORE THAN 40 PEOPLE DIED FROM
BOTH QUAKES.
JAPAN AND ECUADOR BOTH LIE ALONG
THE SEISMICALLY-ACTIVE PACIFIC
RIM "RING OF FIRE" BUT
GEOLOGICAL OFFICIALS SAY THEY
DOUBT THE QUAKES IN BOTH
COUNTRIES ARE LINKED.
THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGNS ARE
HOMING IN ON THEIR NEW YORK
SUPPORTERS WITH TWO DAYS LEFT
BEFORE THE EMPIRE STATE'S
DELEGATE-RICH PRIMARY.
BUSINESSMAN DONALD TRUMP HELD A
RALLY TODAY IN NEW YORK CITY'S
MOST REPUBLICAN BOROUGH, STATEN
ISLAND-- WHILE OHIO GOVERNOR
JOHN KASICH IS SET TO APPEAR IN
SYRACUSE AND ALBANY TOMORROW.
AFTER SWEEPING 14 DELEGATES AT
THE WYOMING STATE CONVENTION
YESTERDAY, TEXAS SENATOR TED
CRUZ TRAILS TRUMP BY 185 TOTAL
DELEGATES IN THE RACE TO 12-
HUNDRED-AND-37 NEEDED TO WIN THE
NOMINATION.
KASICH IS MORE THAN 400
DELEGATES BEHIND CRUZ.
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE, FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON RETURNED TO NEW YORK
CITY TODAY AFTER A WEEKEND TRIP
TO CALIFORNIA, WHICH HAS THE
LARGEST CACHE OF DELEGATES FOR
BOTH PARTIES BEFORE THIS
SUMMER'S NATIONAL CONVENTIONS.
CLINTON LEADS VERMONT SENATOR
BERNIE SANDERS BY MORE THAN 650
TOTAL DELEGATES IN THEIR RACE TO
THE 2,383 NEEDED TO WIN.
JOINING ME NOW TO TALK ABOUT THE
BOISTEROUS NEW YORK CAMPAIGN OF
THE PAST TWO WEEKS IS BOB HARDT,
THE POLITICAL DIRECTOR FOR NEW
YORK ONE, NEW YORK CITY'S 24/7
NEWS CHANNEL.
>> BOB YOU COVERED HILLARY
CLINTON WHEN SHE WAS RUNG FOR
SENATE IN 2000, AND, SHE
PRESENTED HERSELF INTO I'M ON A
JOB INTERVIEW AND YOU SHOULD
HIRE ME.
ARE THERE SHADES OF THAT IN THIS
CAMPAIGN?
>> DEFINITELY.
I'M HAVING DEJA VU ALL OVER
AGAIN.
CRISSCROSSING THE STATE, ALSO
GOING UPSTATE, REINTRODUCING
HERSELF TO VOTERS, REMINDING
THEM SHE WAS THEIR SENATOR FOR
EIGHT YEARS, AND ALSO, THEY
DON'T REMEMBER HER WHEN SHE WAS
A SENATOR BECAUSE SHE LEFT AT
2008.
THERE IS A REINTRODUCTION TO
THESE YOUNGER VOTERS WHO SHE'S
HAVE DESPERATELY TRYING TO STEAL
AWAY FROM THE BERNIE SANDERS
CAMP.
>> BERNIE SANDERS HAS OBVIOUSLY
HAD ENTHUSIASTIC SUPPORTERS IN
NEW YORK, WE'VE SEEN RALLIES IN
WASHINGTON SQUARE PARK AND HERE
IN NEW YORK CITY, ONE IN 10 ARE
ATTACHED SOMEHOW TO THE
FINANCIAL SECTOR, GOING INTO ALL
LIVELIHOODS.
>> EXACTLY.
LIKE GOING INTO TEXAS, AND
TALKING ABOUT OIL AS A NET BAD.
SOME DEMOCRATIC VOTERS AGREE
WITH HIM.
WHILE THE MESSAGE MIGHT BE A
LITTLE DISSONANT TO SOME NEW
YORKERS WHO DO HAVE JOBS ON WALL
STREET AND THERE ARE DEMOCRATS
WHO DO WORK ON WALLETS, I DON'T
THINK THIS HURTS HIM AS MUCH
AS THIS IS A GENERAL ELECTION.
IT WOULD BE TROUBLE THEN.
>> Stewart: DOWN STATE NEW
YORK AND UPSTATE NEW YORK ARE
VASTLY DIFFERENT, NOT IN LOCK
STEP.
HOW IS DONALD TRUMP PLAYING
UPSTATE?
>> THERE IS SUBURBAN NEW YORK
CITY AND UPSTATE.
UPSTATE, HE IS PLAYING VERY,
VERY WELL, WHAT WE'VE SEEN IN
MICHIGAN IS SOME INDUSTRIAL
PLACES UPSTATE THAT NO LONGER
HAVE THE JOBS SO HE'S GOING
THERE AND SAYING, I'M GOING TO
BRING INDUSTRY BACK, I'M GOING
TO GO AFTER THE COMPANIES THAT
HAVE TAKEN THE JOBS ABROAD.
IN THE CITY, HE HASN'T DONE THAT
MANY RALLIES, OUT ON STATEN
ISLAND.
HIS ARE POLLS ARE DOING WELL IN
THE REPUBLICAN RACE BUT HE IS
REALLY RESONATING OUT THERE.
>> YOU'VE WRITTEN HOW THIS WAS
FOR BOTH PRIMARIES A VERY
COMPETITIVE RACE, SOMETHING WE
HAVEN'T SEEN FOR A LONG TIME AND
LED TO WEIRD CAMPAIGNING.
>> YES.
>> WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU'VE
SEEN?
>> JOHN KASICH HAS EATEN HIS WAY
ARE IS ACCREDIT NEW YORK.
FUNNY SEEING TED CRUZ IN A MATZO
FACTORY TRYING TO COURT THE
JEWISH VOTE.
WE HAVEN'T HAD PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES COME HERE EXCEPT TO
YOU FUND-RAISE SINCE 1992, WHEN
BILL CLINTON WAS TRYING TO PUT
AWAY JERRY BROWN, PAUL TSONGAS,
YOU HAD MICHAEL DUKAKIS RUNNING
HERE, BEAUTIFUL SPRING SPRING
DAY, ALSO HAVEN'T SEEN THE
CANDIDATES IN THE WAY WE HAVEN'T
SEEN THEM IN 20 YEARS.
>> BOB HARDT, THANK YOU FOR
BEING HERE.
>> GREAT TO BE HERE.
>> Stewart: THE ABUSE OF HEROIN
AND PRESCRIPTION PAINKILLERS
LIKE OXYCONTIN, VICODIN,
PERCOCET, AND METHADONE NOW
CAUSES ALMOST 30,000 OVERDOSE
DEATHS A YEAR IN THE UNITED
STATES, ABOUT THE SAME NUMBER OF
DEATHS AS CAR ACCIDENTS.
A BIG FACTOR IN THIS AMERICAN
EPIDEMIC IS THE SURGE IN
PAINKILLER PRESCRIPTIONS WRITTEN
BY DOCTORS TO TREAT CHRONIC
PAIN.
THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
RECENTLY ANNOUNCED IT WILL
REQUIRE WARNING LABELS ON
PAINKILLER BOTTLES, AND THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION HAS ISSUED NEW
GUIDELINES FOR LIMITING OPIOIDS.
IN LINE WITH THOSE GUIDELINES,
MORE THAN 60 U.S. MEDICAL
SCHOOLS SAY BEGINNING THIS FALL
THEY WILL REQUIRE STUDENTS TO
TAKE SOME FORM OF PRESCRIBER
EDUCATION.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER LOOKS AT WHAT ESTABLISHED
DOCTORS AND DOCTORS STILL IN
TRAINING ARE LEARNING TO CURB
THE EPIDEMIC.
>> ALONG IN HERE, ANY PAIN?
>> NO, BUT I DID TAKE MY
MEDICINE THIS MORNING.
>> Reporter: LYNN LEVINE IS ONE
OF TENS OF MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
DIAGNOSED WITH CHRONIC PAIN.
AFTER NUMEROUS SURGERIES FOR A
RANGE OF HEALTH PROBLEMS, LEVINE
HAS TAKEN OPIOID PAINKILLERS FOR
THE LAST SEVEN YEARS.
ONE MEDICINE, MORPHINE, IN THE
MORNING.
AND I TAKE AN OXYCODONE AT
AROUND NOON OR 1:00.
AND THEN I TAKE A MORPHINE LATE
IN THE EVENING.
THEY'RE LONG ACTING.
>> Reporter: WHERE WOULD YOU BE,
DO YOU THINK, WITHOUT THE
OPIOIDS?
>> I THINK I WOULD BE LAYING IN
A BED MOST OF THE TIME.
>> Reporter: LEVINE'S DOCTOR,
JOSEPH ZEBLEY, HAS BEEN TREATING
PATIENTS WITH CANCER AND CHRONIC
PAIN SINCE THE 1980S.
HE AND LEVINE RECOGNIZE THE RISK
OF ADDICTION IN TAKING THESE
POTENT DRUGS.
>> Reporter: YOU HAVE A VERY
HEALTHY FEAR OF JUST HOW THIS
OPIOID INTAKE CAN GET OUT OF
HAND.
>> IT CAN.
>> Reporter: WHY?
>> IT CAN, BECAUSE I KNOW IT
CAN, BECAUSE I'VE KNOWN LOTS OF
PEOPLE WHO TAKE IT UNNECESSARILY
AND TAKE IT FOR THE HIGH THEY
SUPPOSEDLY GET OFF OF IT.
AND I DON'T WANT TO BE IN THAT
POSITION.
>> Reporter: AS THE NUMBER OF
U.S. PRESCRIPTIONS FOR OPIOIDS
DOUBLED OVER A 15 YEAR PERIOD
FROM 105 MILLION IN 1998 TO 207
MILLION IN 2013.
THE NUMBER OF FATAL OVERDOSES
FROM THE DRUGS SOARED ALMOST
FIVEFOLD,
FROM 4,000 DEATHS A YEAR IN 1999
TO NEARLY 19,000 IN 2014.
THAT INCLUDES PEOPLE WHO
ILLICITLY USED PRESCRIPTION
OPIOIDS AND THOSE WHO OVERDOSED
ON PILLS PRESCRIBED FOR THEM.
AS RECENTLY AS THE EARLY 1990S,
DOCTORS WERE CRITICIZED FOR NOT
PRESCRIBING ENOUGH PAINKILLERS,
ACCORDING TO DAVID THOMAS, A
DOCTOR WHO WORKS FOR THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DRUG
ABUSE, KNOWN AS "N.I.D.A."
>> BACK THEN, THERE WAS A THING
CALLED OPIOID-PHOBIA.
A LOT OF HEALTHCARE
PROFESSIONALS DID NOT WANT TO
PRESCRIBE OPIATES AT ALL,
BECAUSE THEY THOUGHT YOU GIVE
THE SLIGHTEST AMOUNT, YOU TURN
YOUR PATIENTS INTO ADDICTS.
AND SO EVEN PEOPLE WITH STAGE
FOUR CANCER WEREN'T BEING GIVEN
OPIATES, THEY WERE LEFT TO
SUFFER.
>> Reporter: DOCTOR ZEBLEY SAYS
PRESCRIBING OPIOIDS WASN'T A
TREATMENT OPTION HE EVEN
CONSIDERED FOR CHRONIC PAIN WHEN
HE GRADUATED FROM THE UNIVERSITY
OF MARYLAND SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
40 YEARS AGO.
>> BACK THEN, IF WE WROTE FOR
EVEN TYLENOL WITH CODEINE YOU
WOULD HAVE A PRECEPT, OR
SOMEONE, LOOKING OVER YOUR
SHOULDER AND WONDERING WHY YOU
WERE USING A NARCOTIC.
I THINK THERE WAS A NUMBER OF
WELL MEANING HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS THAT SAID, "THIS IS
WRONG. WE HAVE TO TAKE CARE OF
PEOPLE IN PAIN. AND WE HAVE THE
MEANS, WE HAVE OPIATES."
INSTEAD OF JUST USING THEM TO
SOME DEGREE TO HELP PEOPLE, THEY
WERE STARTING TO BE USED JUST AS
A REPLACEMENT FOR COMPREHENSIVE
PAIN TREATMENT.
AND THEN THERE WAS AN ENTIRE
MOVEMENT AND I HAVE COLLEAGUES
WHO WERE IN PAIN MEDICINE WHO
WERE INVOLVED IN THIS MOVEMENT,
WHO SAID THAT WE HAD AN
UNRECOGNIZED EPIDEMIC OF PAIN IN
AMERICA.
>> Reporter: AS THE APPROACH TO
TREATING PAIN EVOLVED,
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES TOUTED
ACADEMIC STUDIES SAYING
PAINKILLERS CARRIED LITTLE RISK
OF ADDICTION.
>> I THINK I, LIKE MANY OTHERS,
WERE FOOLED INTO AT LEAST
PARTIALLY BELIEVING THAT AND
STARTING TO WRITE PRESCRIPTIONS
MORE LIBERALLY.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH
RESPONSIBILITY DO THE DOCTORS
HAVE IN OUR OPIOID EPIDEMIC?
>> I THINK WE ALL SHARE SOME
RESPONSIBILITY.
BUT I WOULD PUT A LOT MORE AND
THIS MAY BE CONTROVERSIAL, ON
THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY.
I WON'T NAME THE NAMES OF
CERTAIN COMPANIES BUT THEY WERE
IN MY OFFICE 15, 20 YEARS AGO
PROMOTING LONG-ACTING NARCOTICS
WITH ARTICLES IN THEIR DEFENSE
SAYING THAT THESE WERE LESS
ADDICTING.
>> Reporter: IN THE LATE 1990S,
PURDUE PHARMA, THE MAKER OF
OXYCONTIN, WHICH EARNED BILLION
OF DOLLARS IN REVENUE FOR THE
COMPANY, PROMOTED THE PAINKILLER
AS HAVING A LOW RISK FOR
ADDICTION.
BUT IN 2007 THE COMPANY ADMITTED
THOSE CLAIMS WERE FRAUDULENT AND
PAID 600-MILLION DOLLARS IN
FINES.
SINCE 2010, PURDUE SAYS, IT HAS
"REFORMULATED OXYCONTIN WITH
ABUSE-DETERRENT PROPERTIES."
AND IT NOW REFERS PHYSICIANS TO
NEW GUIDELINES FOR OPIOID-
PRESCRIBING FROM THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL.
WHEN RELEASING THE GUIDELINES IN
MARCH, DIRECTOR TOM FRIEDEN OF
THE C.D.C. STATED: "THE SCIENCE
OF OPIOIDS FOR CHRONIC PAIN IS
CLEAR: FOR THE VAST MAJORITY OF
PATIENTS, THE KNOWN, SERIOUS,
AND TOO-OFTEN-FATAL RISKS FAR
OUTWEIGH THE UNPROVEN AND
TRANSIENT BENEFITS."
>> I WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO STOP
'EM RIGHT AWAY.
THAT'S FOR SURE.
BECAUSE I'M PHYSICALLY ADDICTED,
NOT, YOU KNOW, NOT ADDICTED
WHERE I TAKE MORE THAN THE DOSE
THAT THEY ORDER.
BUT I'M PHYSICALLY DEPENDENT ON
THEM.
AND THAT WOULD MEAN A LOT TO ME
IF THEY WERE TO JUST, YOU KNOW,
STOP THE DOSES ALL OF THE
SUDDEN.
>> THERE'S A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF
ANGER ON THE PART OF PHYSICIANS
WHO FEEL TRAPPED.
WE HAVE A LARGE COHORT NOW OF
PATIENTS WHO ARE TAKING THESE
MEDICATIONS LONG TERM, AND ON
THE OTHER HAND WE'RE BEING TOLD,
"WELL, YOU GUYS ARE AT FAULT
BECAUSE YOU'RE WRITING ALL THESE
OPIOIDS."
WELL, WHAT ARE WE TO DO?
>> Reporter: ONE ANSWER TO THAT
QUESTION HAS BEEN FOR MEDICAL
SCHOOLS TO REEXAMINE HOW THEIR
STUDENTS ARE TAUGHT TO TREAT
PAIN.
A 2011 STUDY FOUND THAT DURING
FOUR YEARS OF TRAINING, A
TYPICAL U.S. MEDICAL STUDENT
SPENDS ONLY NINE HOURS LEARNING
ABOUT PAIN.
THAT'S, LIKE, ONE LONG DAY AT
WORK.
THE AMOUNT OF OPIOIDS THAT WE'RE
PRESCRIBING IS WAY TOO MUCH AND
THE AMOUNT OF EDUCATION THAT THE
AVERAGE PRESCRIBER GETS IS WAY
TOO LITTLE.
AND THAT'S A PRESCRIPTION FOR
DISASTER.
>> THE CHALLENGE IS THERE'S ONLY
SO MUCH TIME IN THE DAY AND
MEDICAL STUDENTS HAVE TO LEARN
ABOUT LOTS OF THINGS.
YOU DOING OK?
>> Reporter: DOCTOR ANTJE
BARREVELD IS A PAIN SPECIALIST
AND ASSISTANT PROFESSOR AT TUFTS
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
OUTSIDE BOSTON.
BARREVELD SAYS THAT TUFTS
CURRENTLY HAS NO FORMALIZED
PROGRAM ON PAIN.
RIGHT NOW SHE TEACHES ROUGHLY 5O
STUDENTS A YEAR ABOUT PAIN, FOR
ONE HOUR.
>> SHE TOLD THE NURSE THAT SHE
RAN OUT OF OXYCODONE.
I THINK THAT A LOT OF THE
STUDENTS STILL FEEL THAT
MANAGING PAIN IS VERY
MYSTERIOUS.
THEY STILL JUST DON'T HAVE A
REAL HANDLE ON THE BASICS OF IT.
>> Reporter: SO BARREVELD HAS
DEVELOPED A NEW "PAIN EDUCATION
CLASS" AS PART OF A PROGRAM BY
"N.I.D.A." AND THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.
THEY'RE MAKING 50 TO 100
INTERACTIVE PAIN PATIENT CASE
STUDIES, ACCESSIBLE ONLINE, SO
OTHER MEDICAL SCHOOLS CAN USE
THEM TOO.
THIS CASE STUDY SHOWS A RE-
ENACTMENT OF BARREVELD ASSESSING
A PATIENT WITH A HISTORY OF
CHRONIC PAIN AND SUBSTANCE
ABUSE.
THE STUDENTS THEN MEET WITH HER
TO THINK CREATIVELY ABOUT
TREATMENT OPTIONS, INCLUDING
PHYSICAL AND BEHAVIORAL
THERAPIES AS WELL AS OPIOIDS, IF
APPROPRIATE, AT LOW DOSES, AND
WITH CAUTION.
CAN YOU GET "HOOKED" ON
BUPRENORPHINE?
ABSOLUTELY.
IT'S AN OPIOID.
>> Reporter: TUFTS THIRD-YEAR
MEDICAL STUDENT OLIVIA PEZULO
TOOK BARREVELD'S CLASS AND SAYS
IT WAS MOST COMPREHENSIVE PAIN
TRAINING SHE'S HAD.
>> YOU HAVE A LOT OF EXPOSURE TO
PATIENTS AND PAIN, BUT YOU DON'T
GET THE EXPOSURE TO THE
TREATMENT SIDE OF IT.
>> Reporter: SO THEN WHAT WAS
DIFFERENT HERE?
>> FIRST OF ALL JUST ADDRESSING
THIS IS PROBLEM, THIS IS REAL.
AND THEN COMING UP WITH--
MULTIPLE OPTIONS, WHICH-- AND
SOME ARE OPTIONS.
I'VE NEVER SEEN BEFORE AND NOT
REALLY HEARD OF BEFORE.
>> WE GET TO HAVE PERSPECTIVES
FROM DIFFERENT DISCIPLINES.
A NURSE TREATS PAIN VERY
DIFFERENTLY FROM A DOCTOR OR A
DENTIST OR A PHARMACIST.
BUT WE ALL TOGETHER CAN COME UP
WITH SOME EXCELLENT STRATEGIES
THAT COMPLEMENT EACH OTHER.
IT'S REAL.
YOUR PAIN IS REAL.
BUT YOU'VE MADE SO MUCH
PROGRESS.
THIS IS WHY I HAVE TISSUE BOXES
HERE.
PAIN ISN'T NECESSARILY THAT
SIMPLE.
AND THERE AREN'T EASY ANSWERS TO
TREATING IT.
AND IT OFTEN TAKES A SPECIAL
KIND OF PERSON TO TAKE THE TIME
TO REALLY LISTEN TO THE PATIENT.
SO MODELING THAT FOR STUDENTS,
OF COURSE, IS THE ULTIMATE GOAL.
>> Reporter: WHAT MORE DO YOU
THINK MEDICAL SCHOOLS SHOULD BE
DOING?
>> SO FINALLY SOMEONE IS
RECOGNIZING THAT THIS IS
IMPORTANT.
I'M HOPING THAT IT'S NOT JUST
GONNA BE AN OPIOID-CENTRIC
EDUCATION.
I THINK THIS NEEDS TO BE ABOUT
HUMAN BEINGS AS A WHOLE AND THE
HUMAN THAT SUFFERS.
>> Reporter: THIS HOLISTIC
APPROACH IS SOMETHING THE
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND SCHOOL OF
MEDICINE IS TRYING WITH ITS BY
MONTH-LONG ELECTIVE DEDICATED TO
ALTERNATIVES TO MEDICATION FOR
TREATING PAIN.
THE TECHNIQUES RANGE FROM
CHIROPRACTIC METHODS, TO GUIDED
IMAGERY TECHNIQUES THAT
INCORPORATE MEDITATION.
AND EVEN-- TAI CHI.
FOURTH YEAR MEDICAL STUDENT
KEVIN O'MALLEY TOOK THE CLASS.
>> AFTER TAKING THIS ROTATION, I
FEEL MUCH MORE COMFORTABLE AND
PREPARED FOR TREATING CHRONIC
PAIN IN PATIENTS.
BECAUSE I'VE BEEN EXPOSED TO SO
MANY DIFFERENT THERAPIES, I
THINK IT CAN BE EASY TO THINK,
"WELL, YOU KNOW, SOMEONE'S IN
PAIN, THEY EXPERIENCE IT LIKE
ANYONE ELSE DOES.
AND IT'S MORE COMPLICATED THAN
THAT.
>> Reporter: O'MALLEY PLANS TO
BECOME A FAMILY DOCTOR.
JUST LIKE MARYLAND ALUMNUS
JOSEPH ZEBLEY.
SEASONED PHYSICIANS LIKE HIM ARE
TAKING STEPS TO UPDATE THEIR
TRAINING.
MARYLAND IS ONE OF AT LEAST 20
STATES WHERE DOCTORS ARE
REQUIRED TO TAKE A CLASS IN PAIN
MANAGEMENT, OPIOID PRESCRIBING,
OR SUBSTANCE ABUSE IN ORDER TO
BE RE-LICENSED.
>> DON'T EVER THINK YOU KNOW
YOUR PATIENT EVEN IF THEY SHOW
UP ONCE A WEEK FOR SOMETHING.
YOU DON'T.
I THINK IT'S A REASONABLE FIRST
STEP.
BUT IT'S NOWHERE NEAR SUFFICIENT
TO REALLY HAVE DOCTORS SLOW DOWN
THE USE OF OPIOIDS.
>> Reporter: AT LEAST 12 STATES
ALSO REQUIRE DOCTORS TO CHECK
DATABASES LISTING WHO HAS BEEN
PRESCRIBED OPIOID PAINKILLERS.
BEFORE ISSUING THE FIRST OPIOID
PRESCRIPTION TO A PATIENT.
BUT NONE REGULARLY CHECK TO SEE
IF PRESCRIBERS ARE ACTUALLY
USING THE DATABASE.
>> HAS ANYONE TALKED TO YOU
ABOUT WEANING?
>> Reporter: ZEBLEY STILL FACES
THE CHALLENGE OF MANAGING OPIOID
DEPENDENT PATIENTS LIKE LYNN
LEVINE.
HE SAYS HE'S VIGILANT IN LOOKING
FOR SIGNS OF ABUSE AND AVOIDS
PRESCRIBING OPIOIDS UNLESS IT'S
ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY.
>> Reporter: HOW HARD IS IT FOR
YOU, IN THAT POSITION, AND FOR
DOCTORS TO CHANGE THIS, BEING
LIKE WHAT I WAS TAUGHT WAS
WRONG?
>> WELL, FIRST YOU HAVE TO HAVE
SOME HUMILITY.
THAT'S HARD RIGHT THERE.
AND THEN ONE HAS TO CHANGE.
BUT WE'VE CHANGED HOW WE USE
ANTIBIOTICS.
WE'VE CHANGED WHAT WE DO FOR
HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE.
SO IF YOU HAVE SCIENCE THAT
BACKS YOU UP THEN YOU CHANGE.
IT MAY BE DIFFICULT.
>> Stewart: LEARN MORE ABOUT HOW
THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC IS AFFECTING
PREGNANT WOMEN AND THEIR BABIES.
AMERICAN COUNTRY MUSIC STAR
FAITH HILL CALLS COUNTRY "THE
PEOPLE'S MUSIC" BECAUSE, SHE
SAYS, IT SPEAKS ABOUT REAL LIFE
AND TELLS HOW THINGS REALLY ARE.
OUR NEXT STORY PROVES THE TORCH
AND TWANG HEARD AT THE GRAND OLE
OPRY KNOWS NO BOUNDARIES.
AS PART OF THE "NEWSHOUR" SERIES
"INSIDE KENYA," CORRESPONDENT
NICK SCHIFFRIN HAS THIS LOOK AND
LISTEN AT KENYA'S COUNTRY MUSIC
SCENE.
>>  IF YOU'RE LOOKING FOR SOME
LOVE TONIGHT
THEN I MIGHT JUST HAVE ENOUGH
>> Reporter: ON A WEDNESDAY
NIGHT IN KENYA'S CAPITAL, THE
MUSIC IS FLOWING.
WE'RE SIX THOUSAND MILES FROM
TENNESSEE.
BUT TONIGHT NAIROBI LOOKS, AND
SOUNDS, A LOT LIKE NASHVILLE.
>>  I'VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT IT
ALL DAY LONG
NEVER HAD A FEELING QUITE THIS
STRONG
EVERY TIME I GET ON STAGE, I
LIVE IN THE MOMENT.
WHEN I FEEL THE MUSIC IN THAT
DEPTH, THEY FEEL IT.
IT AIN'T NO USE TO SIT AND
WONDER WHY, BABY.
>> Reporter: ELVIS OTIENO,
THAT'S HIS REAL NAME, WAS BORN
IN 1977, THE SAME YEAR ELVIS
PRESLEY DIED.
OTIENO'S PARENTS NAMED HIM AFTER
THE KING, SEALING HIS FATE.
>>  YOU'RE THE REASON WHY I'M
TRAVELING ON
>> I TRIED EVERYTHING I COULD IN
MY LIFE TO BE AN ENGINEER, AN
AERONAUTICAL ENGINEER.
BUT IT WAS NEVER TO BE, BECAUSE
I THINK MUSIC WAS MY CALLING.
MY HOMETOWN'S COMING IN SIGHT
IF YOU THINK I'M HAPPY, YOU'RE
RIGHT
>> Reporter: HE'S NOW KNOWN AS
"SIR ELVIS."
HE THOUGHT ABOUT BECOMING A ROCK
MUSICIAN.
BUT HE IDENTIFIED MORE WITH
COUNTRY.
>> IT'S DOWN HOME STORIES THAT I
RESONATE WITH.
LISTEN TO THE RADIO
>> Reporter: WHEN HE STARTED
PERFORMING 10 YEARS AGO, HE WAS
THE FIRST KENYAN TO SOUND LIKE
THE ORIGINAL ARTISTS.
>> IF YOU'RE PLAYING BEETHOVEN,
YOU HAVE TO SOUND AUTHENTICALLY
BEETHOVEN.
IF I SING JIM REEVES, IT HAS TO
HAVE A SILKY VELVET WAY OF IT.
I LOVE YOU BECAUSE YOU'RE
UNDERSTANDING
>> HE'S ORIGINAL.
HIS VOICE.
IT'S OUT OF THIS WORLD.
>> Reporter: HE'S AS GENUINE AS
THE MUSIC.
BECAUSE YOU CAN'T DO THIS STUFF
IF YOU DON'T BELIEVE IN IT.
>> HOWDY, FOLKS.
HI THERE AND WELCOME TO THE
STRINGS OF COUNTRY INTERVIEW.
>> Reporter: DAVID KIMOTHO HOSTS
A WEEKLY SHOW CALLED STRINGS OF
COUNTRY.
SIR ELVIS IS HIS BEST KNOWN
GUEST.
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF GUYS WHO
WANT TO PLAY LIKE HIM.
THEY WANT TO SING LIKE HIM. SO
HE IS ACTUALLY, YOU KNOW,
GROWING THE INDUSTRY.
BECAUSE I'M IN LOVE WITH THIS
PRETTY LITTLE GIRL
>> Reporter: KENYANS HAVE BEEN
LISTENING TO COUNTRY FOR 50
YEARS, EVER SINCE KENYA GAINED
INDEPENDENCE FROM BRITAIN.
>> EVEN THOUGH WE WERE COLONIZED
BY THE BRITS, YOU KNOW, WHAT WE
WERE EXPOSED TO WAS AMERICAN
MUSIC.
IT RESONATES BECAUSE OF THE
MESSAGE.
WE CAN IDENTIFY WITH THE
STORIES.
>> Reporter: COUNTRY WAS
ESPECIALLY POPULAR IN KENYA'S
FARMING AREAS.
BECAUSE I AM JUST A COUNTRY
BOY.
MONEY HAVE I NONE.
>> Reporter: ELVIS SAYS HIS LIFE
IS A LITTLE BIT COUNTRY.
HE LIVED IN A FARMING AREA NEAR
THE END OF A RAIL LINE.
>> IN KENYA, PEOPLE TO WORK SO
HARD TO GET THE HARVESTS.
WHEN THEY CAME TO REALIZE THAT
THERE IS A STYLE OF MUSIC THAT
ACTUALLY GOES ALONG WITH THIS
KIND OF LIFESTYLE, THEY EMBRACED
IT.
WHEN YOUR ROOSTER'S A-CROWIN'
AT THE BREAK OF DAWN
>> Reporter: IS THERE ONE SONG
IN PARTICULAR THAT KENYANS
ALWAYS ASK FOR?
>> YES.
"YOU'RE MY BEST FRIEND" BY DON
WILLIAMS.
YOU'RE MY ANCHOR IN LOVE'S
OCEAN
BUT MOST OF ALL, YOU'RE MY
BEST FRIEND
>> Reporter: THE HOMEGROWN
COUNTRY MUSIC INDUSTRY HERE HAS
A LONG WAY TO GO.
EVEN ELVIS HAS NOT RECORDED ANY
HIS OWN ORIGINAL SONGS-- YET.
>> I'M SO EXCITED ABOUT IT,
BECAUSE THIS IS GOING TO BE MY
FIRST SINGLE.
MANSION BUILT PARADISE ON THE
PRAIRIES.
JUST A BIT OF THE SONG THAT I
WROTE!
WASTED AWAY AGAIN IN
MARGARITAVILLE.
>> Reporter: SIR ELVIS BELIEVES
IN A FAMOUS SAYING: COUNTRY
MUSIC IS "NOTHING BUT THREE
CHORDS AND THE TRUTH."
>> SOMETIMES LIFE IS SAD.
SOMETIMES LIFE IS HAPPY.
BUT WE ALWAYS KEEP THE JOY OF
THE MUSIC.
SOME OF GOD'S GREATEST GIFTS
ARE UNANSWERED PRAYERS.
YEAH.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
Stewart: WHAT'S HOPED WILL BE
THE FINAL PUSH TO ERADICATE
POLIO AROUND THE WORLD BEGAN
TODAY.
LED BY THE UNITED NATIONS' WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, THE COMPLEX
AND COSTLY EFFORT INVOLVES
GETTING 155 COUNTRIES &
TERRITORIES TO SWITCH TO A NEW
KIND OF POLIO VACCINE BY MAY
1ST.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE WITH DOCTOR
STEVEN KOCH-EE FROM THE CENTERS
FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION ABOUT THE EFFORT.
PREVENTION, ABOUT THE EFFORT.
WHY POLIO, WHY NOW?
>> THIS INITIATIVE STARTED BACK
IN 1988.
AND AT THAT POINT IN TIME THERE
WERE 350,000 CASES OF POLIO PER
YEAR IN 125 COUNTRIES.
IF WE FAST-FORWARD WE'RE NOW
DOWN TO ONLY TEN CASE HE OF
POLE -- CASES OF POLIO IN THIS
CALENDAR YEAR SO WE ARE ON THE
VERGE OF COMPLETELY FINISHING
THE JOB OF ERADICATING POLIO.
>> WHAT IS THE VACCINE THAT
THIS ONE DOESN'T DO?
>> IT IS A THREE IN ONE VACCINE.
IT CONTAINS EACH OF THE THREE
TYPES OF POLIO VIRUS.
NOW WE ARE AT A POINT WHERE THE
TYPE 2 POEM YOA VIRUS NO LONGER
EXISTS IN THE WORLD -- POLIO
VIRUS NO LODGER EXISTS IN THE
WORLD.
THIS LOUSE US TO REMOVE THE TYPE
TWO FROM THE ORAL VACCINE.
THE TYPE 2 VIRUS IN FACT ALL
THESE VACCINE VIRUSES VERY
RARELY CAN MUTATE AND CAUSE
POLIO THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE
FROM THE NATURALLY OCCURRING
POLIO.
SO BECAUSE THERE IS NO TYPE 2
POLIO OCCURRING IN THE WORLD WE
CAN REMOVE THE TYPE 2 VIRUS FROM
THE VACCINE AND WE WILL NO
LONGER HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT THESE
VERY RARE CASES OF POLIO CAUSED
BY THE ORAL POLIO VACCINE.
>> FINALLY, THE LATEST ROUND OF
UNITED NATIONS BROKERED PEACE
TALKS OF THE WAR IN YEMEN START
TOMORROW IN KUWAIT.
BOTH SIDES EXPRESSED
WILLINGNESS TODAY TO FINALLY
END THE YEAR LONG CONFLICT
THAT HAS KILLED 6,000 PEOPLE.
AGREEMENT COULD ALSO REDUCE
TENSIONS BETWEEN SAUDI ARABIA
AND IRAN WHO BACK RIVAL SIDES IN
THE FIGHTING.
TOMORROW THE SUPREME COURT
HEARS ARGUMENTS ON PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S ORDER TO LET
UNAUTHORIZED IMMIGRANTS WITH
CITIZEN CHILDREN REMAIN IN
THE COUNTRY.
THAT'S ALL FOR PBS NewsHOUR
WEEKEND, I'M ALISON STEWART,
GOOD NIGHT.